Today's video is brought to you by athletic greens,
comprehensive all among greens powder engineered to fill the nutritional gaps in
your dirt support.
Your body's nutritional needs across the four pillars of health, gut health,
immune support, energy and recovery.
It's packed with 75 vitamins and minerals and whole foods, sourced ingredients,
combining the perfect amounts of micronutrients absorbed and taste to jumpstart
your daily routine.
You'd be hard pressed to find a more comprehensive powder slash supplements on
the market.
Now, you guys know I'm not exactly a fitness YouTuber.
I'm not exactly a fitness person,
probably not coming to my channel for squat tips,
but I do like to still eat right and take care of myself and pathetic greens is
that comprehensive nutritional supplements that I know is going to account from
the holes that are blatantly in my diet, because I know it's not super balanced.
Just one scoop into the water bottle in the morning. It even comes,
it comes with all of this stuff. You got the water bottle, you got the scooper.
You don't take it out of the packet, like a Savage.
They even provide this nice little tint to put it all in, keep it in the fridge.
Plus it's gluten free, dairy free paleo vegan, keto,
low allergen and low calorie. There's less than one gram of sugar per serving,
but despite that it does taste sweet and good.
One of the things that I like about it is I,
I still drink my coffee in the morning, but I have a cup of this along with it.
And it just makes me feel like I'm being more healthy.
And I also feel like the kind of energy from the coffee lasts longer.
No idea if that's just in my head, but it's absolutely working.
Athletic greens is the perfect dietary supplement regimen.
So if that sounds like the supplement you've been looking for,
you can grab your own immunity bundle.
That's one year of vitamin D plus five individual travel packs like
this that come along with it. Those are for free, just great athletic
greens.com/biographics or click the link in the description below.
And now today's video.
The Americans wanted him dead.
The Mexicans wanted him dead stuck in the middle between two larger,
much more powerful forces,
Apache warrior AMO strive to preserve his people's way of life.
He did this the only way he knew how by fighting make no mistake
about it. Despite the image everybody has of DRMO as this old calm and wise,
man,
he spent most of his life fighting and killing those who got in the way of his
band of APA.
He wasn't the kind of tribal chief to advocate for peaceful solutions. In fact,
Dromo was never a tribal at all. He was a medicine man and a warrior,
but people gravitated towards him. Nonetheless,
he was a natural born leader who guided his people through the Apache wars,
the most violent and turbulent time in their history.
The most commonly accepted information says that Toronto was born on June the
16th, 1829 in Turkey Creek, Arizona, somewhere near the Giller river.
He belonged to the bed on koge bands.
One of the smallest groups of the chiqua Apache, his birth name was GAAS,
which meant one who Yorns. He adopted the Spanish named Geronimo later in life,
although we're not exactly sure why we all go with the most popular and most
badass reason,
which said that he was such a fierce and fight to the many Mexican soldiers
began praying to some drone when they faced him in battle theba warrior,
like the way that sounded and accepted it as his new name Dromo was a man
born into conflict.
The Apache had been waring with the Spanish for hundreds of years,
and the violence continued with the Mexicans.
Once they gained their independence in 1821, there's a new state.
Mexico was eager to establish its territory.
So it lay claims the land where the B had settled. As you might imagine,
the Apache disagreed with their claim and with no peaceful solution in sight.
The only remaining option was war. When Jeronimo was young,
the Apache chief who served as the biggest thorn in Mexico side was named
Manus Colorados. As soon as Geronimo reached fighting age,
he started joining the Apache gangs on raids against Mexicans led by Manus,
sent his more famous son-in-law Kachie decades. Later.
Manus Colorados meant as a very gruesome and shameful one that even germo called
the greatest wrong ever done to the Indians,
but it did not happen at the hands of the Mexicans or rival tribes,
but rather the Americans in 1863 color was taken into custody by the union
army. After meeting under a flag of TRUS bad night,
the general in charge future Louisiana,
Senator Joseph Rodman west told his centuries that he had no,
no intention of negotiating. And he wanted the Apache chief dead by morning.
The soldiers first tortured the imprisoned 70 year old color artist with heated
bare nets.
And then they shot him to death and buried him in a shallow grave later,
claiming that he tried to escape the next day.
They concluded that they could stoop even lower if they really tried hard
enough. So they dug up the body cut off the boiled,
the flesh off and sent the skull to a phenologist in New York,
despite S from his descendants and historians.
The current location of the skull remains a mystery and a nice friendly reminder
of the American government's treatment of native Americans. Of course,
all of this happens later,
but young Romo also learns pretty quickly not to put too much stock in
government promises. During the mid 1850s,
there was a tenuous piece between the Apache tribes and the nearby Mexican towns
after decades of violence that left many dead on both sides. By that point,
Geronimo had officially become an Apache warrior.
He had married a woman named lo and they had three children together in March,
1858.
Most of the men in Geronimo's bands left on a trading mission to a town that
they called CA better known as Jan in the state of Chihuahua.
While the warriors were gone,
the Mexican army mounted a surprise attack act on the BCA ban,
stealing all of their supplies and sling almost everyone that they encountered
in his memoirs tarami recall the horrors that waited him when he arrived home
late one afternoon, when returning from town,
we were met by a few women in children who told us that Mexican troops from some
other town that attacked our camp, killed all the warriors of the guard,
captured all our ponies secured.
Our arms destroyed our supplies and killed many of our women and children
quickly. We separated concealing ourselves as best we could until nightfall.
When we assembled at our appointed place of Rone who were thicker by the river
silently, we stole in one by one sentinels were placed.
And when all were counted, I found that my aged mother,
my young wife and my three small children were among the slain
Following the murder of his entire Adrian Geronimo was left with a burning
hatred for Mexicans and an urge for revenge that haunted him for most of his
life, going by Apache stories,
Geronimo received divine protection to assure him that his quest for vengeance
was righteous. After he had set fire to his family, his belongings,
he went alone into the forest to mourn their loss.
Very heard another worldly voice, the promised to guard him.
So no gun will ever kill you.
I will take the bullets from the guns of the Mexicans,
and I will guide your arrows whether real or not the spectral voice kept up.
Its end of the bargain. Geronimo was shot many times,
but no gun ever killed him. On least one occasion.
The Apache warrior ran out of arrows while fighting Mexican soldiers.
So he just charged them with fire and fury ordering in his eyes,
zigzagging his way through the hail of bullets and killing them all up close
with his knife. Let's not sugar coat. This Droman,
his band of warriors killed a lot,
a lot of people and not all of them were soldiers armed and ready for a fight.
Here's the how just one of Romos raids went in a summer of 1866 as tall by the
man himself. I took 30 mounted warriors as an invaded Mexican territory.
We went south through chihuahuas,
far cent Cruz Sonora then crossed over the Sierra mare mountains,
following the river course at the south end of the range,
we kept on Westwood from the Sierra mare mountains to the Sierra to SA repay
mountains and followed that range. Northwood. We collected all the horses,
mules and cattle we wanted and drove the Northwood through Sonora into Arizona.
Mexicans saw us many times and in many places,
but they could not attack us at any time nor did any troops attempt to follow
us. When we arrived at homes, we gave presents to all and the tribe,
feasted and danced during this raid, we had killed about 50 Mexicans.
This is how things went for the next 15 years or so.
The Mexican killed the Apache and the Apache killed the Mexicans in return.
They were trapped in a vicious cycle of death where each side felt justified in
striking the other,
either as revenge for a previous attack or to stop a new one.
There was an attempt at reconciliation in 1873,
the Apache and the Mexicans matters casts grander in OA,
sat down together and agreed to a treaty just for a little moment.
It looks like it might be possible to end the violence between the two sides,
but in the IOR words of Admiral ABA, it's a truck.
Once the treaty had been signed,
the Mexicans brought out the Mascal to celebrate, not once turned down booze,
the cherry KA choir got nice and drunk. And when they were all wasted,
two companies of Mexican soldiers of the town,
a Massa at the Toronto was among the lucky ones. He managed to escape,
but it left his band of APA severely weakened and put an end to the raids for
the time being. And if that wasn't bad enough,
he also had to contend with a new threat. From the other side,
During Toronto Mo's time,
the Don COA people usually divided their time between the territories of Arizona
and New Mexico with occasional incursions into the Northern Mexican states to
conduct raid. At first, this was all land, the Mexico laid claim over,
but the landscape changed drastically during the late 1840s.
Thanks to the Mexican American war.
After a decisive victory for the United States,
the two countries signed the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848.
According to which Mexico not only recognized Texas as belonging to the United
States of America,
but also seeded a gigantic stretch of lands that makes up most of
today's American Southwest. This is included the lands of the Apache ands,
many other native Americans and with the California gold Russian full swing by
the 1850s, the two sides were soon at odds with each other.
As they fought over territory.
Surprisingly drama was not among the first to take on the American army instead
throughout the 1850s and 1860s.
Other Apache leaders such as Manus color and CCHI were the
ones who resisted American encroachments.
We've already mentioned how that ended for Colorados, but Katrice,
someone managed to avoid a similar grizzly fate after over a decade of fighting
the us army tooth and nearly signed a peace treaty in 1872 and lived his last
year's quietly dying of natural causes in 1874 during the mid 1870s,
the government's that up,
the San Carlos reservation in Arizona room wanted to move all the chiqua
Apache there, as you might imagine,
being confined to such a single area was an a many native Americans who were
used to roaming the lands completely free.
It's not like the reservation was particularly nice either.
There was an arid waste land where food shortages and disease were rampant to
truly deserving of the nickname that it earns Hells 40 acres in
a shocking twist that nobody could have seen coming.
Many Apache refused to go along with this plan and immediately rebelled against
the us government preferring delivers Outlaws.
If it meant keeping the Noma way of life. At this point,
there were three men that de Turko are Apache turned to for guidance.
One was DRMO who,
although not a tribal chief had earned enough respect that his word carried a
lot of weight. The other two were actual chiefs and the names were J and TA.
The latter of these was the eldest son of Kachie and of the three.
He was the one most willing to try and adapt to a new lifestyle.
If it meant peace for his people, he traveled to the San Carlos reservation,
willingly taking will them about a third of the Chiha afterward.
He even went on a delegation to Washington DC,
where he quickly felt ill with pneumonia and died.
So not exactly an auspicious sign for the Apache American relationship,
especially since rumors started flying that TA had actually been poisoned.
As far as J Ando were concerned,
they took the rest of the chia and made their way to New Mexico,
unbeknownst Tomo. He had just made a new mortal enemy. John Clem,
not that it made much difference to you JMO to have one extra man who wanted him
deads, but well, who was John Clemons?
Why did he have it in for the B donkey warrior? Well,
Clem was the Indian agent who negotiated the deal to relocate the Apache to the
San Carlos reservation. Initially both J and Taza were willing to move,
but then Jeronimo came along and talk to J out of it.
If Clem would've managed to get all the Chi art to settle in the reservation
peacefully,
it would've been a major boon for his career and he would've gotten away with it
too, if it wasn't for that pesky Romo. Anyway,
now Clem's plan went to hell and he wanted the Apache warrior dead as a
consolation prize. It wasn't hard for him to track Romo down,
especially after he got a few Apache Scouts to rat him out Jerone.
The rest of the Chiha were on the O Callen reservation living alongside the warm
Springs. Apache led by chief Victoria,
Clem set up a trap that the unsuspecting JMO who had no idea he was being
pursued and managed to capture him alive without the need for violence,
likely to Clems disappointment. Since he would've appreciated it.
If the Benko leader had had given him a reason to strike him down right then and
there, well,
he didn't and Jeronimo was brought in shackles to the San Carlos reservation
where Clems dissatisfaction continued undoubtedly.
He was hoping for a speedy execution for the Apache re,
but he didn't get one maybe for the first time ever bureaucracy saved the day
ASMO sentence was delayed of the department of war and the bureau of Indian
affairs bickered over who had jurisdiction over the Chi Kawa.
After a few days,
drawn saw an opportunity to escape and de took it as it turned out.
Clem didn't hate him enough to go through all of that again. So inster,
he simply resigned from his post.
The early 1880s were very violent and active period for the Apache one that
helped seal reputation is one of the most dangerous native American nations in
the United States on Theran from the law.
Many Chi crossed the border into Mexico and hid out in the Sierra Madre
mountains. Their Dromo was joined by other famed warriors, such as J chief.
NNS the ironically named ban.
They often led raids along the border ranches wagon, trains, men, URS,
prospectors, the Apache attacked them all without mercy or hesitation,
and usually left no survivors to prevent their location from being discovered
even. So the Chi choir couldn't remain hidden forever.
And as the trail of bodies, they left in their wake,
put them on a collision course with both Mexican and American armies
One way or another 1883 saw the violence between the three groups come to a head
first, there was the older,
more bitter rivalry between the APA and the Mexicans,
which ended in an all out battle in the mountains,
in the state of Sonora as Romo scouted, the enemy,
he heard the Mexican general strucks meant to kill every single actually men,
women, and children,
and warns that any deserters would be shot on site with little to lose DRMO
signal, the start of the battle by killing the general with a well placed shot.
The fighting lasted all day from sun up to sundown with the Mexican troops
wavering and rallying several times eventually a Fu managed to sneak behind
enemy lines and set far to the long grass behind the Mexican army.
The chaos that ensued allowed the Apache to flee into the mountains.
JMO claims that that was the last time he ever fought the Mexicans.
Surprisingly,
the American army had an uncharacteristically tempered approach trying to find a
peaceful resolutions of their conflict with the Apache. Sure.
They'd started a few skirmishes first.
They didn't carry all of that ammo for nothing after rule,
but eventually they negotiated for the chia returns, the reservation.
This was mainly due to the man in charge general George crook,
who was somewhat of a civil rights advocate for native Americans at a time when
such a position could sink a political on re career.
There was begrudging respect between him and the Apache leaders.
They referred to him as tan Wolf and considered him a good enemy and worthy
adversary. Meanwhile,
crook describes the Jerich Koa Apache as acuteness of sense,
perfect physical condition, absolute knowledge of locality,
almost absolute ability to persevere from danger. We have before us,
the tiger of the human species in his memoirs,
Geronimo gave a much harsher opinion on George crook. He didn't trust him.
And he thought that the general wanted him dead indeed.
While it sounds like the two descriptions might be at odds with each other.
Bet's not really the case. Even some who wanted peace with the tur,
would've realized that they would probably have an easier him,
of some kind of unfortunate accident gone to drawn him outta the way since he
was after the main instigator. Anyway,
crook never attempted anything of the sort.
So we can only speculate on his true intentions.
What we do know is that DRMO Ben,
some of his warriors changed their minds and turns back while the other
Chihuahua taken to a new reservation called Turkey Creek.
Eventually Mo made his way there about a year later,
but life on the reservation didn't stick this time either in 1886,
he instigated another escape.
Even though this time only a few dozen Apache followed him,
perhaps assign more and more of them were getting tired of life on the run like
before drama defaulted to his tried and true tactic of retreating into the
Sierra Madre mountains.
Crook actually caught up to him one last time and persuaded him to surrender
again.
Johno agreed that became convinced that he would be hanged when he reached the
reservation. So he fled for the third time. This was one failure, too many.
And president gro of Cleveland replaced crook with a new general named Nelson
Marles unlike crook, Marles had no respect for the Chi.
Are he didn't care if he brought drawn back in shackles is in a coffin or with
his head on the silver platter. As long as he gone the job done
During J's last run,
he had less than 40 Apache with the Manon 18 of the were warriors. Meanwhile,
general mills had 5,000 soldiers,
hundreds of native American Scouts and a few extra thousand militia.
The scales were just slightly tipped in the latters favor.
The chia still fought,
but the writing was on the wall for Oey surrender was inevitable,
but Marles found a particularly despicable way to hurry it along by punishing
the chia who stayed behind on the reservation over 400 of them were arrested and
sent to prisons in Florida, thousands of miles away.
That way the free chia knew that they would only see them again.
If they surrendered finally in the summer of 1886,
Toronto surrendered at skeleton canyon for the fourth and final time,
I will quit war path and live at peace hereafter.
He told general mills in his memoir.
He said that Mar promised him not only that he would not be arrested,
but that he would receive a house with land and livestock. Of course,
Jonah wasn't stupid enough to actually believe this,
but he hoped that Marles would at least respect the conditions of the surrender,
which included allowing the chia to see their FA am in Florida. However,
the us government had a nice little streak of broken treaties going.
So what difference would just one more make almost as soon as the deal was
signed miles declared ital reasoning that Geronimo had broken previous terms of
surrender. In reality, it is highly doubtful.
He would've ever accepted anything other than a complete and unconditional
surrender.
The iCal are when now prisoners of the us army bringing an end to the Apache
wars,
even though minor skirmish has still continued for a few more decades following
their arrest DRMO and the rest of his band boarded, a train,
never to return to the lands that they knew and loved. First,
they were taken to Fort Pickens in Florida,
where they were forced to do hard labor every day. Meanwhile,
the first group of Jurich AUA was Withing away due to malaria.
And so it was moved to Mount Vernon and Alabama.
It wasn't until two years later, the OSE group was finally allowed to join them.
And when this happened,
a wave of tuberculosis tried to finish what the malaria had started during the
mid 1890s,
that Chihuahua relocated again to fought SI reservation in Oklahoma,
since the landscape better resembled the environment that were familiar with.
But by that point only 120 or so chia remained.
That is where Geronimo spent the last 15 years of his life.
He tried his best to fit in. He took up farming.
He even became a Christian and joined the Dutch reform church,
but was kicked out because he wouldn't stop gambling.
When he promised to quit the war path and live in peace. He meant it,
even though he was frustrated and hard broken by the government's continued
refusal to allow him to return home. He never took up arms again.
Instead Toronto made the best of a bad situation by capitalizing on his
notoriety as the worst Indian that ever lived. That's how he built himself.
As he toward the nation,
appearing at affairs and exhibitions in front of stunned audiences,
he had only reads and herd ho.
He is about the ferocity and cruelty of the infamous Romo.
He even took part in Teddy Roosevelt's presidential inauguration parade.
It was all pure exploitation of course,
but Romo made more money now than he had in his whole life.
He signed anything and everything that had his signature on sold out.
And so it was that the once ruthless killer became one of the hottest brands in
the country Mo died on February the 17th, 1909.
He had been bucked off his horse while riding home and the 79 year old spent the
whole night in the cold before anyone found him. By that point,
he fell with pneumonia and died a few days later in recent decades,
a strange urban legend is AISM,
which says that members from the skull and bone society at Yale university
robbed the grave in 1918 and stalled roo skull.
And that it's still in their possession truth is that we don't really know
what's inside the grave because the army filled it with cement in 1928 and
placed a stone monument on top of it.
So for now this remains the final uncertain chapter in the,
the life story of Geronimo.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below.
Don't forget to subscribe and thank you for watching.
I.